.Dd January 5, 2015
.Dt DISK161 1
.Os System/161 2.x
.Sh NAME
.Nm disk161
.Nd System/161 disk utility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm disk161
create
.Op Fl f
.Ar filename
.Ar size
.Nm disk161
info
.Ar filename ...
.Nm disk161
resize
.Ar filename
.Ar delta-size
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm disk161
utility manages System/161 disk images.
.Bl -tag -width createzz
.It Dv create
When run with the
.Dv create
command, it creates a new disk image of the requested size.
Unless the
.Fl f
(force) option is given,
.Nm disk161
will not erase or clobber an already-existing file.
.It Dv info
When run with the
.Dv info
command,
.Nm disk161
prints information about one or more disk image files.
.It Dv resize
When run with the
.Dv resize
command,
.Nm disk161
changes the size of an existing disk image file by the requested
amount
.Ar delta-size ,
which may be positive or negative.
Note that
.Nm disk161
changes the physical size of the disk; if the disk image contains a
file system or other data, one must also take file-system-level steps
to resize the logical structure.
In particular, shrinking a disk image without first shrinking the file
system on it will throw away data and often fatally corrupt the file
system.
.El
.Pp
The
.Ar size
and
.Ar delta-size
values may be given in bytes (plain number, or "b" suffix),
sectors ("s" suffix),
kilobytes ("K" suffix),
or (traditional) megabytes and gigabytes ("M" and "G" suffixes
respectively);
sizes must be a multiple of the sector size, which is 512 bytes.
.Pp
Note that System/161 disk images contain a 1-sector header with a
signature string; this is to help prevent accidents.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sys161 1
.Sh BUGS
System/161 only supports native System/161 disk images, which are
plain raw images with a 512-byte header.
It would be helpful to support compression and possibly other more
advanced formats, such as the
.Xr qemu 1
.Dv qcow2
format.
