.Dd January 5, 2015
.Dt STAT161 1
.Os System/161 2.x
.Sh NAME
.Nm stat161
.Nd System/161 status monitor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm stat161 Op Fl i Ar interval
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm stat161
program prints hardware counters from a running System/161 process.
If no such process is running in the current directory,
.Nm stat161
waits until one starts, polling once per second.
If the System/161 process exits,
.Nm stat161
disconnects from it and waits for another to start.
.Pp
The
.Fl i Ar interval
option sets the reporting interval in seconds of virtual time; valid
values are between 0.00001 (10 microseconds) and 2.
The default is 0.2.
.Pp
The counters printed are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width kinsnsww -compact -offset indent
.It nsec
Virtual time in nanoseconds.
.It kinsns
Instructions retired in supervisor (kernel) mode.
.It uinsns
Instructions retired in user mode.
.It udud
Unproductive cycles spent in user mode.
(These represent instructions that were interrupted and aborted.)
.It idle
Cycles spent idle.
.It irqs
Number of interrupts taken.
.It exns
Nunmber of processor exceptions taken.
.It disk
Number of disk I/Os.
.It con
Number of console I/Os.
.It emu
Number of emufs I/Os.
.It net
Number of network I/Os.
.El
The values printed are totals across all CPUs.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width .sockets/meter -compact
.It Pa .sockets/meter
The socket used to read information.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sys161 1
.Sh BUGS
The set of counters printed and the print interval are fixed.
The print interval depends on the internal timing of System/161 and
may thus vary depending on workload.
